As I took note of the place,
it cannot be far where he abides.
What's to be thought of him?
Does the rumour hold for true that he's so full of gold?
Certain.
Alcibiades reports it;
Phrynia and Timandra had gold of him.
He likewise enriched poor straggling soldiers
with great quantity.
Then this breaking of his
has been but a try for his friends.
Nothing else.
You shall see him a palm in Athens again
and flourish with the highest.
Therefore 'tis not amiss we tender our love to him
in this supposed distress of his.
It will show honestly in us
and is very likely to load our purposes
with what they travail for,
if it be a just and true report that goes of his having.
What have you now to present unto him?
Nothing at this time but my visitation.
Only I will promise him a most excellent piece.
I must serve him so too,
tell him of an intent that's coming towards him.
Good as the best.
Promising is the very air of the time.
It opens the eyes of expectation.
Performance is ever the duller for his act;
and, but in the plainer and simpler kind of people,
the deed of saying is quite out of use.
To promise is most courtly and fashionable.
Performance is a kind of will or testament
that argues a great sickness in his judgment that makes it.
I am thinking what I shall say that I have provided for him,
it must be a personating of himself,
a satire against the softness of prosperity,
with a discovery of the infinite flatteries
that follow youth and opulency.
Nay, let's seek him.
Then do we sin against our own estate,
when we may profit meet and come too late.
True;
when the day serves, before black-cornered night,
find what thou wantest by free and offered light.
Come.
Hail, worthy Timon!
Our late noble master.
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
Sir, having often of your open bounty tasted,
hearing you were retired,
your friends fallen off, whose thankless natures
O abhorred spirits
Not all the whips of heaven are large enough.
What!
to you, whose star-like nobleness
gave life and influence to their whole being.
I am rapt and cannot cover the monstrous bulk
of this ingratitude with any size of words.
Let it go naked; men may see it the better.
You that are honest, by being what you are,
make it best seen and known.
He and myself have travailed in the great
and sweetly felt it.
Ay, you are honest men.
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Most honest men.
How shall I requite you?
Can you eat root and drink cold water?
No?
What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.
You're honest men.
You've heard that I have gold?
I am sure you have.
Speak truth;
you're honest men.
So it is said, my noble lord;
but therefore came not my friend nor I.
Ay, good honest men.
Thou drawest the best counterfeit in all Athens.
Indeed, thou art the best;
Thou counterfeitest most lively.
So, so, my lord.
Even so, sir, as I say.
And, for thy fiction, why,
thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth,
thou art even natural in thine own art.
But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,
I must needs say you have a little fault.
Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you,
neither wish I you take much pains to mend.
Beseech Your Honor; make it known to us.
You'll take it ill.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Will you, indeed?
Doubt it not, worthy lord.
There's never a one of you that trusts a knave,
but mightily deceives you.
Do we, my lord?
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
know his gross patchery,
love him, feed him, keep in your bosom.
Yet remain assured, he's a made-up villain.
I know none such, my lord.
Nor I.
Look you, I love you well;
I'll give you gold;
rid me these villains from your companies.
Hang them, stab them, drown them in a draught,
confound them by some course,
come to me; I'll give you gold enough.
Name them, my lord; let's know them.
You that way and you this,
each man apart, but two in company,
all single and alone,
yet an arch-villain keeps him company.
If where thou art two villains shall not be,
come not near him.
If thou would not reside but where one villain is,
then him abandon.
Hence, pack!
You came for gold, you slaves.
There's gold.
You've worked for me;
there's payment!
You're an alchemist;
make gold of that.
Out, rascal dogs!
It is vain that you would speak with Timon;
for he is set so only to himself
that nothing but himself which looks like man
is friendly with him.
Bring us to him.
It is our part and promise to the Athenians
to speak with Timon.
At all times, alike men are not still the same.
'Twas time and griefs that framed him thus.
Time, with his fairer hand, offering the fortunes
of his former days,
the former man may make him.
Bring us to him, and chance it as it may.
Lord Timon.
Timon.
Look out, and speak to friends.
The Athenians, by two of their most reverend senate,
greet thee.
Speak to them, noble Timon.
Thou sun, that comforts, burn.
Speak, and be hanged.
For each true word, a blister,
and each false be as a cauterizing
to the root o' the tongue,
consuming it with speaking.
Worthy Timon
Of none but such as you and you of Timon.
The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
I thank them
and would send them back the plague,
could I but catch it for them.
Oh, forget what we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The senators with one consent of love
entreat thee back to Athens;
who have thought on special dignities,
which vacant lie for thy best use and wearing.
They confess towards thee
forgetfulness too general, gross.
You witch me in it;
surprise me to the very brink of tears.
Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
and I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
Therefore, so please thee to return with us
and of our Athens, thine and ours,
to take the captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
allowed with absolute power
and thy good name live with authority.
So soon we shall drive back of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
who, like a boar too savage,
doth root up his country's peace.
And shakes his threatening sword against the walls of Athens.
Therefore, Timon
Therefore, I will, sir;
therefore, I will, sir; thus.
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
let Alcibiades know this of Timon:
that Timon cares not.
But if he sack fair Athens
and take our goodly aged men by the beards,
giving our holy virgins to the stain
of contumelious, beastly, mad-brained war,
then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it.
In pity of our aged and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him
that I care not and let him take it at worst;
for their knives care not,
while you have throats to answer.
For myself, there's not a whittle in the unruly camp
but I do prize it at my love
before the reverendest throat in Athens.
So I leave you to the protection of the gods,
as thieves to keepers.
Stay not; all's in vain.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph.
It will be seen tomorrow.
My long sickness of health and living now begins to mend,
and nothing brings me all things.
Go; live still;
be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
and live so long enough.
We speak in vain.
But yet I love my country and am not one
that rejoices in the common wreck,
as common bruit doth put it.
That's well spoke.
Commend me to my loving countrymen
These words become your lips as they pass through them.
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
in their applauding gates.
Commend me to them,
and tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
their pangs of love, with other incident throes
that nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
in life's uncertain voyage,
I will some kindness do them.
I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.
I like this well;
he will return again.
I have a tree which grows here in my close
that mine own use invites me to cut down.
Shortly must I fell it.
Tell my friends, tell Athens, in sequence of degree
from high to low throughout,
that whoso please to stop affliction,
let him take his haste, come hither,
ere my tree hath felt the axe,
and hang himself.
I pray you, do my greeting.
Trouble him no further;
thus you still shall find him.
Come not to me again,
but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
who, once a day, with his embossed froth,
the turbulent surge shall cover.
Thither come; let my gravestone be your oracle.
Lips, let four words go by and language end.
What is amiss plague and infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, death their gain.
Sun, hide thy beams.
Timon hath done his reign.
His discontents are unremovably coupled to nature.
Our hope in him is dead.
Let us return and strain
what other means are left to us in our dear peril.
It requires swift foot.
The enemy's drum is heard,
and fearful scouring doth choke the air with dust.
On and prepare.
Ours is the fall, I fear,
our foes the snare.
Till now you have gone on
and filled the time with all licentious measure,
making your wills the scope of justice;
till now, myself and such
as slept within the shadow of your power,
have wandered with our traversed arms,
and breathed our sufferance vainly.
Now the time is flush,
when crouching marrow in the bearer
strong cries of itself, "No more."
Now breathless wrong shall sit and pant
in your great chairs of ease,
and pursy insolence shall break his wind
with fear and horrid flight.
Noble and young, when thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
we sent to thee to give thy rages balm,
to wipe out our ingratitude with loves above their quantity.
So did we woo transformed Timon to our city's love
by humble message and by promised means.
We were not all unkind,
nor all deserve the common stroke of war.
These walls of ours were not erected by their hands
from whom you have received your griefs;
nor are they such that these great towers,
trophies, and schools should fall for private faults in them.
Nor are they living that were the motives that you first went out;
shame that they wanted cunning,
in excess hath broke their hearts.
March, noble lord, into our city with thy banners spread.
By decimation, and a tithed death
if thy revenges hunger for that food which nature loathes
take thou the destined tenth,
and by the hazard of the spotted die, let die the spotted.
All have not offended;
for those that were,
it is not square to take on those that are revenge.
Crimes, like lands, are not inherited.
Then, dear countryman, bring in thy ranks,
but leave without thy rage.
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
which in the bluster of thy wrath
must fall with those that have offended.
Like a shepherd, approach the fold,
and cull the infected forth, but kill not all together.
What thou wilt, thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
than hew to it with thy sword.
Set but thy foot against our rampired gates,
and they shall ope;
so thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
to say thou'lt enter friendly.
Throw thy glove, or any token of thine honor else,
that thou wilt use these wars as thy redress
and not as our confusion,
all thy powers shall make their harbor in our town,
till we have sealed thy full desires.
Then there's my glove.
Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof fall
and no more.
And to atone your fears with my more noble meaning,
not a man shall pass his quarter
or offend the stream of regular justice in your city's bounds,
but shall be rendered to your public laws at heaviest answer.
'Tis most nobly spoken.
My noble general, Timon is dead;
entombed upon the very hem of the sea;
and on his grave-stone this insculpture,
which with wax I brought away,
whose soft impression interprets for my poor ignorance.
"Here lies a wretched corse, wretched soul bereft.
"Seek not my name.
"A plague consume you wicked caitiffs left.
"Here lie I, Timon,
"who, alive, all living men did hate.
"Pass by and curse thy fill,
but pass and stay not here thy gait."
These well express in thee thy latter spirits.
Though thou abhorredst in us our human griefs,
scornedst our brain's flow and those our droplets
which from niggard nature fall,
yet rich conceit taught thee to make vast Neptune weep
for aye on thy low grave, on faults forgiven.
Dead is noble Timon
of whose memory hereafter more.
Bring me into your city,
and I will use the olive with my sword,
make war breed peace, make peace stint war,
make each prescribe to other as each other's leech.